We're talking to Carol Moore.
Do you use a middle initial?
Not really.
Okay.
And your formal title is?
Chief Librarian.
Okay.
And this is for the whole university system?
Yes.
So you have perhaps 50 or 60 libraries under your... Well, it's a complex administrative structure, and the main university libraries are in what's called the central system.
And that includes the Pittsburgh Library, the Fisher Library, the Lyons Library.
the education library.
There are a number of divisional libraries that report to divisions, and I have more coordinated responsibility.
But that's under review constantly, actually.
One thing that's very interesting is I understand that, and you don't, I don't see this certainly in the United States, but I'm sure there are a few examples, but you do have a protected budget, isn't that right, for book?
For acquisitions, yes.
Correct.
I mean, that's unusual.
Yes, although I think a number of people do inquire, and the issue is the protection for inflation and against budget cuts for public institutions.
The fate of the government funding affects us a lot.
So there was a, it really has been from the late 50s and when there was a review of the whole library system, all of the interesting libraries.
The evaluation was we didn't have a strong library and we really needed to build it.
And at that point.
And this was about when?
In the late 50s.
Okay.
So the decision was made.
To build the library, you know, be a great research library.
What do you think the basic numbers were at that time, just as if you could possibly do?
I wish I could.
Okay.
I wish I could say, but it was, it wasn't a strong research library.
The president at that point, Claude Bishop, which was then by the 60s, was a professor of English and was really interested in having a great library.
We started at that point also to add to the faculty
And we traditionally had quite a good, strong humanities practice as well as other disciplines.
And all the disciplines grew greatly in the 60s in the library as well.
And this library was planned at that moment too.
About 1968, there was an end to the capital funding.
And this was one of the last large buildings that we built for about 20 years.
We were very fortunate, really, in getting this amount of space, and it really has made it possible to store the material.
And generally, how many titles did you say are stored in here on this building?
At the moment, it's probably about approaching format.
That's more than Widener.
It was built to accommodate
as easily as 4.5 million.
So we're beginning to approach the limits here.
So what do you do at that point?
Well, that's a good question.
The plan was 25 years, and so we have... That doesn't happen in fact?
No, the plan, I think it's phenomenal, actually.
When you look back at what they planned, there have been a lot of changes, and a lot of their assumptions were not quite right, but the overall result was right.
The compact storage in the two sub-basin are really only starting to be really well used.
So I think, yeah.
Well, we really haven't even used them all.
So that's, I think, where we're going now.
You opened about, what, 73 or so, is that right?
Yes, we opened in 73.
So your 25 years are up next.
Basically, it's worked precisely as planned.
That's right.
So what do you do in 1999?
Well, what we're doing right now is using all of the bases and trying to use the contact storage.
We're also adding to the other satellite, not the other facilities, the science library, which I was just looking at plans.
We're trying to extend that.
We looked at off-site storage, but about 10 years ago when I took on the position,
that the university strongly encouraged us to look at on-site services, a more usable context, because of the cost.
And I know this is really not the way most people are thinking, but I think it's actually preferable from the user's point of view.
Well, from the user's point of view, you don't have to go someplace far distant, and we don't have to try to retrieve the things and essentially operate another
And actually a whole staff and logistical apparatus to get the stuff back and forth, as they do at Harvard, which I've been to see that deposit for.
I have to live about 10 miles from it.
And it is something.
It's stuff that nobody is using.
But it does represent an attitude there, and it's actually quality that there's no such thing as a deck book.
I think in our informal discussions last night, you did indicate that books absolutely are alive here at the Union.
Maybe you could just tell me a little bit about that attitude.
I mean, I don't see, you're not deaccessioning things, you know?
No, with the exception of some duplicates, you know, we've got a lot of materials for reading lists.
And after that, they go off.
After we go off the reading lists, they're really not used very much, so we only keep
And the other unusual part of our system is we have the federated college system.
So we have a number of colleges, libraries.
So we actually have quite a lot more duplication on those classes in the college libraries.
Victoria College, St.
Michael College, Trinity College.
But they're part of the university?
They're part of the university system.
This is more like the greater system than that.
Is there any kind of, I know that the educational system is a provincial matter and not a federal matter, but is there any kind of a national policy for book acquisition?
No.
So you're all basically doing your own thing.
How representative is this sort of?
We discussed this federally, and in fact, with the origins of this library, a lot of it, there was federal funding for research collection.
That has shrunk over the years, and the passage of the responsibility to almost completely prevent you.
There's less and less, which I think is a real problem for us.
As compared to the U.S.
or the nuclear libraries or Germany, Australia, all of them have policies that help strengthen death in ways that we may not really do.
It's a serious problem.
How do you feel, I mean, any modern university is going to have to be
to the electronic revolution that's upon us.
Do you have a dichotomy that separates the electronic stuff from your own mind philosophically, even from the printed books?
Who do the printed books figure into this stuff?
Well, this is back to the front end of answering your question about attitude.
My own background is in what I started in reference in public service, although I worked all over the library.
It seems to me that it's quite possible that the future could be simply more of everything.
That has been our experience, at least in this type of library.
Our experience so far is that whatever we've done electronically, we've tried to stay at the leading edge electronically because it provides a lot of access that we were able to provide if you just look at providing print materials in one location.
or the cardcaverone, you have to come into it.
So it really does extend access in lots of ways.
On the other hand, whatever we've done has increased the book and print news quite a lot.
And the more we do electronically, the more people use the print.
And at present, I think the better job we do in making things accessible, the more support we have on campus for this protective system.
the more accepted acquisition systems.
But we're talking about books when you say that.
Yeah, the books.
But they also want, the scientists also want the databases, and so do the humanities policy.
Which are essential.
They need it all.
When I was out at Stanford doing research for this book, they said, look, you do a scientific monograph.
It costs a fortune to buy.
You might sell a thousand copies for an extraordinary amount of money, and by the time it's printed, it may be obsolete or whatever.
Something like this really probably does belong as an electronic publication.
Oh, I think you're right.
There's not going to be any changes.
I just think that that makes sense.
I mean, you can access it, and you'll find some way if you want to download it and print it, because the office certainly has to get paid in one way or another.
It would seem to me that if you're going to write something, and somebody's not going to buy a physical book, but they're going to just pull it off of some sort of warranty system, because you won't have people writing books.
or the OED or encyclopedias, you know, reference things that really make sense, I think, electronically.
But, you know, when you talk about novels and poetry and creative things, I mean, the book, people who say the book is dying, I mean, they're really burying it, I think, a little too soon.
That's just my own sense of the situation.
But, I don't know.
I agree.
I think, I can envision
In fact, if you look at some young people's behavior, it looks like they don't read books at all because it's possible that you read a future without a lot of books.
On the other hand, there's a revival of interest in some types of books and a huge market for some types of books.
So that's why I say it's quite possible that maybe the scientists or the humanities people,
can get whatever they need online on the deadlock more conveniently, I think that that has a terrific attraction.
We're trying to deliver as much that way as we can because we can't have 70,000 users here.
We can't have everybody trying to share one copy of a journal very effectively, but we have them on the sites of the photographs.
And that's not an efficient tool, so it makes much more sense to have it on there.
things that are heavily used on some sort of online, and even perhaps things that are not used very often called up on an online.
On the other hand, once people get interested in it, I think it's just like collecting, once people discover that there is more, they get led into that, the more into the past, into the thoughts that people had
you know, in other times or other places.
And the question of browsing both the online system and then being taken into other formats, I think it's just more a question of inaccessibility that why people don't need to be involved upon than the fact that they don't want to.
There are so many people in the world that are interested in almost every arcane subject.
It's just that they don't have the opportunity to all get together or come
come to one particular library.
How do you respond?
You know, you have to respond to a specific instance, but I'll give you one, you know, when you hear that it's been reported in the Chronicle of Higher Education elsewhere.
When a brand new college is starting up in Monterey, California, everybody knows this story.
And there isn't even a library in the plans.
Of course, it was intended to be, I guess, a scientific or technical school.
How do you respond?
to that when you hear something like that.
Well, I think you often do hear sort of forward thinking administrators talking like this.
And sometimes they believe it, but really they don't need any kind of library information.
And I think that's not it.
They just seem informed.
In other cases, I think they're just overstating the case.
Yeah.
They don't need to place a lot of emphasis in it.
You aren't under any kind of, I shouldn't use the word pressure, but pressure from trustees, or I don't know if you have trustees or by the administration, to say, look, you've got 10 million books.
That's a lot of books.
At some point, there's a ceiling.
Is there anything like that in there?
Is there any limit to the minimum book?
Because books are expensive.
And to maintain and to take care of them and to house them and to shell them, that costs money.
And people who are looking at expenses have to take this stuff into account.
And especially when they see a book like the one I mentioned last night that hasn't been read in 85 years, you have to justify keeping that book, don't you?
I'm talking on a very general basis.
Some people do think that way.
I think it doesn't take
too long to explain that we are the largest library in Canada.
And certainly as a country, we want at least one great research library.
And so this is already it, and so we shouldn't be building it.
So I, in the long run, I think I have not had a lot of trouble making that case for us.
Some of the smaller libraries definitely have that problem, because they say, well, why duplicate it?
You can't possibly invest as much, so why not just share resources with another library?
And so I think that's the issue with the U.S.
How many of these collections can you build?
Everybody can't be a harlot.
So shouldn't we do something else?
So maybe there are a few who are emerging from the pack and who are either assuming for themselves the responsibility for being the major repository.
And I heard this in Harvard.
the University of California system together with me and the UCLA.
You know, they've got about 15 million books, and they go off-site and store.
You know, you find these, there are these areas emerging, and there might be half a dozen of them at some point.
Library of Commerce, of course.
I mean, it's a big one.
But you don't have a comparable Library of Commerce up there, do you?
No, the National Library got quite a late start.
But that's strictly Canadiana, I guess, right?
Yes, it was in Indiana, so.
Right.
And obviously, academic researchers need other fields.
When you talk about a research library, I mean, just explain in language terms what that means.
Well, it's a question which you can really study in depth and breadth of a variety of different fields.
I think it also includes primary databases and electronic files.
I think that is one of the great issues.
More and more things are really never reaching information, reaching prints.
The amount of that is worth keeping, storing, and I think we haven't really decided how to handle that problem very well.
You mentioned going back to the 50s when you gave me the name of the president, but the decision was made, listen, we are going to become a great institution.
When you think of greatness as one of the
criteria of libraries.
To achieve greatness, do you have to have a major library?
At a university, yes.
At any university.
You would measure that.
I mean, what are the best colleges and universities in North America?
One of the things that you would look at, I guess, is the library.
Does that make sense?
You have to have the numbers.
In terms of the size of the collection?
Numbers?
Both.
Numbers and also the quality of the materials.
Yes.
Now, that is a .
I guess if you want to be recognized as great, you have to have a great library.
Is that what I mean?
I mean, if you're going to assume that you would be dismissed.
I think so.
If you had a mediocre collection.
I certainly think so.
Many people argue that you don't, the so-called printage or collection numbers isn't what matters, it's the access.
That may be true, but I think you have to have guaranteed access.
It's not enough to have it.
You have to have access.
You have to make it available.
But that means if you're an institution who has decided not to buy it, then you have to guarantee the access in some way.
You can't just assume someone's going to do it for you.
And that, I think, is both for...
You can't just assume that the Library of Congress is going to supply knowledge for everyone.
And that's the kind of assumption when I think sometimes people building new institutions say, oh, well, we'll get this from somewhere, without thinking about what they're saying.
If you really are sure that someone's going to provide it for you, then I think you can definitely rely on that.
You've got to put those things in place.
It's not the big pile of books that suddenly are going to do the job for it.
So you do have a different perspective.
You have all of these libraries, Richard being rare books, of course.
Yes, right.
I haven't discussed this at all with anybody who's curious.
You know, obviously when you need money to acquire things like that,
sure that a good part of his job is to go and raise money.
You really rely on the kindness of your friends, I guess, in your books.
But do you have a mandate for supporting special collection acquisitions?
In the university?
Yeah.
Oh, yes.
I think those unique or rare materials are really what
a lot of the researchers use and what distinguishes us from the other libraries.
And what attracts major scholars.
Well, and as we continue building, and this is the question about access, as much as people say that maybe you don't need, many people, everything, you can get most things online, or you're going to be able to get most things online,
hearing scholars either come here, they want to go to Harvard, they want to go to other great libraries in the world.
They do go because they have lots of materials.
I don't believe they go for any other reason.
It's not just reputation.
They go to using materials, and it's large numbers.
So I think this idea that we need to swing more to access is true, but it's been overstated, I think, in our profession.
Or at least be nowhere out of here to get a hold of it.
I did an interview with Stephen Jay Gould for, and this will be another chapter just talking to writers, and he says, he can't work, and of course it's all the spiritual stuff, but he said, there's something about handling the original document.
Yes.
Oh, wow.
And, you know, and he said, a facsimile just won't do for me, or a book.
He really wants to handle the original book and all that.
and i i wonder how many scholars feel that way that you have to have they really have to have access to that primary stuff so i don't know i'm just thinking out loud on that but well i think there's always a difference between the original the original whatever format it is and the and the practice so that is why we're to be um honest that we were partly um we're just getting started in the preservation area
We hired a preservation librarian, and we listened to what was going on in the U.S.
about, at that point it was microphones mainly, materials that were in terrible condition, and they were discarding them.
And we started doing that as well, and we, on the grounds that these things were unusable, we received a lot of criticism that these things really weren't unusable.
And if you just looked at them,
They weren't unusable.
They were the artists.
They may become unusable in another 40 years, but in fact, we changed our thinking on that and put everything back on the shelves.
We don't just find anything.
That's right.
At the University of Michigan, they actually have committees, and they look at that.
Can we afford to keep this book in five years, let's say.
Five years, I guess, is the number that they've thrown out.
used an item in five years, maybe we should take a look at it.
And it's something that maybe is better served online or accessionate.
And, you know, they really are having to study.
I'm fairly concerned about that.
I mean, you buy a book with the... I would say you have to feel the responsibility that you're not just buying books for a
You know, the kids who are here now, you really are buying from me 85 years down the line.
When I need this book, thank goodness it's there.
Do you agree with that?
I do.
I mean, there are a lot of institutions in the United States that say, I agree with you in principle, but it's very expensive.
We're reaching the point we can't afford to do that anymore.
And you are.
I am finding cases where you see.
that they are swinging.
I mean, they're building buildings.
They're not even called libraries anymore.
You know what they are.
They can get resources and resource centers, blah, blah, blah.
They're not libraries.
And that's really a fundamental change.
I don't know.
I don't know where I'm going with this, but what I see here is very healthy.
Well, it's not right for us.
It's definitely not right for us.
I can't say every library should.
or every university should have the same thing.
Maybe it's right for some smaller places.
But you certainly have achieved a position of preeminence in Canada, and I guess it's important to maintain that position for you.
I think it's actually very rewarding in that people actually use it a lot.
We circulate nearly 7 million items per year.
Wow.
And from my perspective,
That means lots of people are attempting to learn a lot of things.
Yeah, I'm doing an interview Saturday with Martin Gregorian, who I got abroad.
He said, come on down Saturday before he goes to take off to the Carnegie Corporation.
But I think of the nine years, he was abroad.
I don't know the numbers, but he certainly didn't have a library to prepare.
So that's maybe they hadn't been invited.
but I think he tried to double it.
I mean, don't hold me to that figure, but he really actively went out to increase the reading and the holding his books.
And he also commissioned a study, this woman who was dean of, I don't know which she was dean of, but also commissioned a study of what students are reading.
I saw that in the New York Times.
I'm going to ask him about that, you know, to really determine what students are reading in their private life and also, you know, the books that matter, I guess.
I don't know how that relates to
long-term acquisitions, but it is interesting to see how to expect.
I don't want to take up too much of your time.
When I met you, I thought this was a great opportunity to get some comments from you.
Thank you for coming in.
I think it's a great opportunity.
I mean, this really will work its way into this new book I'm working on.
If it's at all possible, maybe I can contact your staff.
If there are any figures of how I would love to have something that might document your holdings in the 50s
and how the decision was made to strive for greatness and how this was reflected in, you know, I mean, I've got figures at Harvard, you know, how the numbers are written.
You see the graph go up like that.
And I'd love to, if you had something comparable that might document that for me, that would be wonderful.
Okay.
Can I give you my card?
I'll do that.
I hate to ask you to do it, but maybe you could have some... Sure, sure, no, no.
It's not that hard to get to.
It would really be very... I'm sorry, it's in my jacket today.
Do you have a card, by the way?
Yes, I do.
We got my database.
See, here I am talking about databases.
I'm sorry.
Just some of them.
Why don't you come back over here close to me?
That is affected me now.
Oh, thanks, Carol.
And thinking about...
What are the possibilities or what the effects of libraries?
I guess all of us had experiences of our own.
When did, I don't know, when you discovered libraries or got this interest in them, but when I was, definitely when I was still in high school and even maybe junior high, I had a few professors who said, well, okay, this is actually in the Sanford area.
that you should actually look more in depth, and they gave you some path to, at that point, what was the local research library that was raised.
And I must say that I was just, you know, I keep thinking back that I was just amazed at the richness of ideas on any particular subject, on whatever it was I was researching.
And it just was so amazing to me as a student at that point.
And I've been really privileged to work in huge research libraries, both Stanford and Columbia here.
You could always search whatever it is interested you.
And working as a reference librarian, you could help other people, you know, look into whatever it is that they were doing.
And they became really excited about that and other people's ideas.
And it's been my goal to make sure that at least every person that goes through the University of Toronto has a chance to experience that if they haven't already.
Because there are many people that come from places where they've never seen us.
Now, an assembly of all of us acknowledged.
And I don't think we've achieved that yet.
It's not easy to do this with the numbers of students in a way that's actually
a personal good experience so that you have the kind of piece and contemplation and all of the materials that you could do at those private universities.
But that's what we're trying to do, and I think we've made fun, and we certainly have the support of our faculty.
That's great.
And of course, when you say building collections, you don't just go out and buy books.
Right.
The stores are there.
You say, well, give me one of that, one of that.
You certainly have to talk to your faculty.
Right.
And I mean, it's got to be a very systematic, intelligent program of strengthening the collections in the areas where they're needed.
And I suppose that you get that kind of a recognition from the faculty.
So it seems to me.
Right.
So when you build in collections, it is an intelligent thing.
Well, in fact, a lot of the collections have been built by faculty with their own collections, and they give them at the end of their careers.
because they don't really have anybody to pass them on to and they want to pass them on to the students in the future.
Thank you.
So that's really been, that's what fills a lot of the Fisher and a lot of our library as well.
It's a beautiful facility that is.
Yeah.
Fisher.
And I have to tell you, Richard has the, I mean, it's the first time I've met him once briefly in New York.
But he has the respect of everybody, I have to tell you.
We're very lucky to have him.
He's highly, highly regarded.
Well, we're trying to keep him here.
He's done a terrific job for him.
I just can't tell you the respect and admiration.
Holding in your hands what, Richard?
We're not.
What do you call this level, this level one?
This is actually the second floor.
So you don't actually have formal dedicated?
No, they're called the mezzanines, first mezzanine.
Oh, nice, okay.
Second mezzanine, third mezzanine.
So we're on the first mezzanine?
Well, we're really the first mezzanine's one above here.
Okay.
You're holding a 1425, about roughly.
Yeah, Parisian book of ours.
Sure.
decorated by, well, John Plummer saw photographs of this and said, aha, the atelier of the Bedford Master.
But I had a student who did some work on this one time, and she said it wasn't the Bedford Master at all.
somebody else.
But art historians, of course, can't sleep at night unless they attribute things to somebody.
Look at the detail.
Has there ever been a facsimile in this?
No.
It's very fresh because it was in a private collection in Germany for 300 years.
God, look at that.
The binding is prison, but later, 1590, we got it down to from these tools.
It possibly was earlier bound in velvet or something like that.
But I'll see if I can find her name.
Now, who is she?
She's the person who did what?
She owned it, I believe.
Her name was Jean, or Jean.
Are these signed illuminations at all?
No.
Do we know the artist?
We don't.
No.
It's only, it'll be the, it's somebody of, this is the same quality as the Bedford.
We don't even know his name.
If this were to be removed in another context, this would be an artwork of major significance, wouldn't it?
That's what it is.
Nobody cares about the text.
It's just another book of ours, about the use of parents.
Jacqueline, her name is Jacqueline de Bufy.
and then there's the name of the house.
So she was the person for whom this was made, isn't it?
I would guess that probably it was commissioned by her father.
She was obviously from a wealthy family, and probably when she took her final vows, this was her gift.
Now, she obviously didn't read it very much.
I mean, some books of ours are summed, but, of course, you shouldn't have to read the hours.
You're meant to know them.
So it's a kind of, it's a religious object.
How did it make its way here?
It came here, it's on deposit here, from a German collection.
From Germany?
Yeah.
That's wonderful that they chose Toronto.
Yeah, that happened quite a long time ago.
It's been in Toronto since the 70s.
This is the Catholic Army.
Oh.
They should give you some tables up here, where you don't run the risk of your... Sorry.
It's a wonderful coffee because it's in a 17th-century binding that's very plain.
And it's been bound so that you can actually see the cancel.
And one of the points of this, the question about this is the paper.
You can see the watermarks very clearly here.
They're all bull's head stars, which is the first sort.
controversy about this says right here, 1460.
And La Guntina, Mainz.
And this is generally presumed to be from Gutenberg's press.
Gutenberg didn't die until 1468.
His type, and his present is type, I guess.
That's right.
Now, the question is, there's three different sorts of papers in this, and it's thought that possibly 14, well, this is a controversy fought out in the Gutenberg-Yar book on an annual basis by Lottie, Helen Gove, Paul Needham, with now some intervention from a guy from Buchenwald, who came here and spent a week
with this book.
Now, Lottie's seen it.
Now, why this book as opposed to... Well, this was a copy that had never been used before.
It had never been looked at by these people.
Paul's never seen this.
He knows it's here, but... Has he been?
No, but Lottie has.
Can I see the famous colophon on this?
Isn't this the one that said... Isn't this the book that has the colophon that this was done by Stylus?
Oh, it does go on a bit, yes.
That's fine.
It's done mechanically and not with the... To the glory of God and all that other stuff.
But some people have thought... That's wonderful.
...that this really...
It means 1460s, not just 1460s.
But I don't know enough about it.
What's the seal?
Oh, that's the arms of the Palmersfeld and the Schoenborn family.
And there's the other interesting thing about these, which Lottie Hellinger is the one who knows all about this.
these initials, these pen and ink initials.
She can actually identify, in some cases, the shops that these were done in.
So they would send these sheets over to this?
Yeah.
In Mainz, there were illuminators and decorators who did these kinds of things.
Now, what's rubrication?
Well, rubrication is all the red bits.
Literally, rubricate means to mark in red, although they use blue.
But those have been done in different shops?
No, they'd probably all be done in the same shop, but a different person would do the really fancy stuff.
And then...
But sheaths could be sent, of course, all over Europe.
What are these symbols?
I think that just means part two, book two.
It looks like it was done yesterday.
The paper is incredible.
But this is a great copy for a scholar because it's not in a fancy binding.
If you go to the morgue and look at theirs, either it's in some kind of beauty
fancy contemporary bindings, so they'll only let you open it this far.
In other words, in terms of access?
Yeah.
Well, in terms of being able to see the physical evidence, it's got cancels in it.
But what you're saying to me is that because of a fancy, fancy binding, the scholar can't see the text.
That's right.
It's pretty... It's kind of ironical when you come right down on it, isn't it?
Yeah, sure.
Well, there have been books...
I mean, one collection that the University of Virginia has, which is binding... No, it's actually... It's winning.
It's winning.
The date of gift specifically says that one book cannot be opened.
You're kidding.
This is at Virginia?
Yeah.
Do you know what book it is?
I can't remember the date of the collection.
No, that's Terry.
Terry would know, huh?
Terry would know, yeah.
U-V-A...
has a book.
I believe that's right.
That Deed of Gift says can't be opened.
You know, it's obviously a European book?
Yeah, it's a 17th century book, I think.
Because, of course, there's strength as an American down there.
Wonderful.
Yeah.
No, this is just a group.
The whole group can't be opened?
No, I think it's this...
My recollection is that it applies specifically to this one book.
This is some of the teasing stuff.
I'm going to find one with decorations.
But these are, this, I've forgotten the date.
I'd have to look at the list unless somebody's maybe written it in for me.
What happened to it?
Well, it's been damaged because, of course, early Hebrew manuscripts normally are, well, many of them have perished, of course,
But when you see them, they often are damaged because they've had a tough time through the century.
But here it is.
So, now, are these parts of... This is the Freedberg collection.
Oh, yeah.
Here's one of those pages.
So, I mean, there are many things here for a scholar to... Oh, yeah.
They had, there's already people have been here from New York, Philadelphia, Jerusalem.
They know this stuff exists.
And this is what Gail was talking about yesterday.
Yeah.
The guy, you know, these things are so important.
Now is this stuff that you as an institution went out and acquired or kind of came your way through the beneficence of a collector?
These are prayers.
Because that's all text.
You know, there's prescription against images.
So the decorations done with text, some of them are very elaborate style games.
How old roughly?
This one I think is 13th century.
But there's a fragment here that is 9th century, I think.
There's an 11th century fragment.
But there's one of them that if the dating is right, it's the earliest surviving Hebrew.
This is?
Not this one.
It's another one.
That's pretty old, though.
Even earlier, yeah.
Well, when you say earlier surviving, what roughly?
I think it's the date, the provisional date, but of course they're arguing about it, is 841.
What's the surface?
Is it paper or vellum?
No, it's vellum.
Vellum, yeah.
You're flipping through fragments here.
This early thing is probably preserved in bindings.
But this is an incredible collection.
So the name of this collection?
Friedberg.
Albert Friedberg.
And Albert Friedberg was... He's a Toronto businessman.
He's a currency trader.
Did he collect these or he funded them?
He's collected them.
He reads them.
He's a serious scholar in the sense that... Is he still alive?
Oh, yeah.
He's in his 50s, I guess.
Really?
A young guy?
Yeah.
And so this stuff... He's got lots more.
So one hopes you'll get more.
Yeah, that's right.
I think part of his motivation was that scholars knew that he had this stuff, and they wanted to get access to it.
And we really got on to him because our Hebrew guy, who works here part-time, tried to arrange to have a microfilm made for someone in Jerusalem.
See, just anticipating what happened.
And approached Friedberg.
And I guess he'd probably been approached before as well.
And then he started thinking about maybe this stuff should be in an accessible place.
He can't deal with scholars in his house.
Well, his house is big enough to hold many scholars.
He's got a professional research library here.
That's right.
You want to help as far as you can, but you can't have a reason to grab your door every day.
Do you foresee this stuff being scanned?
Oh, yeah, quite possibly, yeah.
I mean, I think scanning technology, when it gets to the point where it can handle an external lens,
You know, we have an archivist photocopier with the cradle.
Right.
When we can do that without scanning?
Without physically?
Yeah.
And they claim that exists.
I mean, Minolta and so on will phone you and tell you it exists.
I'm next door where they do the scanning, and they have a big digitizing project.
Oh, does it?
Toronto does.
It's been done through preservation.
Right.
They say that actually the external lens isn't good enough yet.
Of archival quality.
That's right.
But when it is, then it'll take over from microfilm.
So where are they doing this physically?
Next door?
Next door, yes.
And what kinds of things are they scanning?
Well, they're doing two kinds of things.
Books that have totally fallen apart.
Is there something I can see?
This is a lock, so it doesn't have to be formal.
We can go over there, sure.
Let me show you this.
I don't mean right now, I mean just... Okay, this is kind of... Can you just play with these things, just enjoy them?
Sure.
When I think that, I actually lose myself in the stack sometimes.
Are you just talking about this?
This is the ninth edition of Grey's Elegy, but it says from KL Neptune at sea.
KL is Catherine Lowther, and she was... Catherine Lowther.
L-O-W-T-H-E-R.
who was James Wolfe's fiance, or at least he thought she was his fiance.
Neptune is the name of the ship he came to North America on, to Halifax.
So this is an association copy of some note?
Well, yeah.
The paths of glory lead but to the grave is underlined.
There's one of Wolfe's notes, how ineffectual are often our own unaided
exertions, especially in early light.
Question mark.
Most of these notes... Can you do the whole thing?
How many shining lights owe to patronage and affluence what their talents would never procure them?
So what's the significance of this?
Well, he's complaining about not advancing fast enough in the army
There's other people because they have more powerful patrons and so on, and the aristocracy get preferment and so on.
Now, this is written by a man who's the commander of the British forces in North America.
Because, once again... James Wolfe.
General James Wolfe.
Spelled W-O-L-F-E.
And... Mark Tom and Wolfe are just the same Wolfe.
That's it.
Died on the Plains of Abraham.
He's 31.
one would have thought that his advancement, in fact, had been pretty good.
So he then goes on to Quebec.
This feels so important.
Scales the cliffs.
And, in fact, the legend has it that on the eve of the battle, while he rowed up the river, Wolfe repeated from memory grazelegy, which...
if you read it more than twice, you've memorized this practically, and said, I would rather have written that poem than beat the French tomorrow.
Come on.
That's the legend.
This is a very, very important book.
Of course it is.
This is our seven millionth volume.
Well, let me just give it a touch.
Yeah.
We got this because...
I was asked by the Friends Steering Committee to find a 7 millionth volume for, this was many years ago, several years ago, and I guess they thought that I'd find, you know, a nice and cumulable for $25,000 or so, but I happen to know the existence of this because it was owned by Edwin Wolfe's brother, Roberts,
And it came into that family because, well... So it was in the U.S.?
Oh, yeah.
The provenance of it was that after the battle, Wolf's body was sent back, and this book was sent back.
Now, he didn't have this on the battlefield.
Sent back to where?
To England with his body, and was given back to Catherine Louder.
Catherine K-A-T-H-A-R-I-N-E.
I'll check it out.
There must be a book of biography.
This has been written out.
This is the kind of thing I use.
This is great.
It's what a book tells you beyond what it tells you.
There's a bit in that article I did in Bibbio, I think, although it's probably not after Amy rewrote it.
Ask me about being edited by Bibbio when we have a free moment.
Catherine Mather
then married Harry Pollack.
So it has his book, Duke of Bolton.
C-O-W-L-E-T.
She became the Dowager Duchess of Bolton, and she died in 189.
She outlived Bolton by 50 years.
Well, did she retain an affection for him, do you think?
Certainly.
I don't know.
There was a big row in the family about this...
portrait of her that Wolfe had that he had commissioned a special frame with brilliant teams and his mother didn't want to pay for it.
Anyway, she gave it to her personal maid as a souvenir of the great general Wolfe.
The maid gave it to her daughter, she gave it to her daughter, and it then disappeared into France.
It turned up and
Rouen or somewhere in France at the end of the century.
It ended up in London in 1912 when it was looked at by Beckles Wilson.
Did you think all these owners along the way had any concept of the significance of this?
Oh, I think so.
Then it was sold to Rosenbach in 1916 for $5,000.
and was bought from Rosenbach by his cousin, who was also his attorney.
His name was Wolf, and that was Edwin's father.
Edwin's father lived into his 90s, very old.
Edwin made 80, 82.
No more than that.
He was, you know, Edwin was the best man at our wedding.
I didn't know.
That makes perfect sense.
He said it the first time.
Sorry.
You can't come in here.
The door shouldn't be unlocked.
Yeah, he said it was the first time he'd been your best man since 1935.
That's funny.
Anyway, I think Rosenbach sold it to...
Edwin's father, based pretty much entirely on the name Wolf to Wolf.
They're still in existence.
In fact, Robert Wolf still owns the portrait of General Wolf that Clarence Wolf, who's a cousin, who's McManus.
Who's McManus, right.
He was trying to sell.
He was trying to flog it to me last time I was down there.
So I went down, I phoned Edwin and said, is there any chance your brother might be willing to part with this great elegy?
He said, sure, I'll ask him, so he asked him.
And he said yes, and the only question was the price.
So Clarence and I negotiated the price, and I paid $325,000 U.S.
dollars, which was almost 400,000 Canadians.
And I can tell you all this because it got leaked to the press.
It was reported, and there was a great fuss.
But the money all came from a federal fund for repatriating Canadian treasures.
Three-quarters of it came from there.
The other quarter, the friends raised, so it didn't actually cost the institution anything.
It's not many ways to do it.
No, you're preaching to the choir now.
I think it's where, what's money?
Like the guy says in Texas, he says, what's money?
They go out and they buy a machine one day that's obsolete for $5 million.
And what the hell is that?
What good is that?
These books?
This box.
It's a national treasure, isn't it?
And of course, what does the biographer learn?
This is an essential... Well, you know at least that Wolfe may or may not have repeated Graves Ellery on the eve of the battle, but you know he read the poem.
Sure.
And you were saying something about the box, I interrupted you.
Oh, that was made here.
I'll show you our conservation panel.
Because that's pretty interesting, too.
That was wonderful.
That was the seven millionth book.
Did you also choose the eight millionth?
Yeah.
Well, that was what?
That was...
Well, for the 8 million, actually, I got a little more inspired.
I knew they would be nervous about me buying something.
So I got a donated thing, and it's Sloan's History of Jamaica.
But the great thing, in fact, is the 8 million and first volumes,
which was the Cologne Chronicle, 1499.
Nice copy, and much, much rarer than the Nuremberg Chronicle, which we have two.
And then the eight million and second volume was the only Jane Austen we didn't have, the one that Gail mentioned, George Cagall.
The eight million and
The third was a five-page holograph letter of Galileo.
There are only three Galileo letters in North America.
Where are the other two?
Curiously, in Philadelphia.
No, sorry, there are four.
Dibner has one.
Dibner, who's the Dibner?
Bern Dibner, Berndy Library, Norwalk, Connecticut.
What library is that?
Science, history, science.
Most of the books.
What's that library?
The book's out of the Smithsonian.
Okay.
It's the Burndy Library.
B-E-R-N-B-U-R-N-D-Y.
It's the name of Dibner's company.
And his name is Burnd, B-E-R-N, Dibner.
I think he's now dead.
The Scientific Library in Norwalk?
Norwalk, Connecticut.
How did this thing go?
He lived in Norwalk, Connecticut.
Well, I'm not sure what's still there because a lot of stuff went to the Smithsonian.
But the other two Galileo letters are in the Historical Society of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
They're in the grass collection of autographs.
And the amusing thing about that, you mentioned legacies of genius.
last night.
Well, Marie, she did that.
That's why I nodded to her when I met you.
One of the things they wanted to exhibit was the Galileo letter.
They were going to illustrate it in the catalog.
But they had two.
So I was visiting Marie
when the catalog was in proof.
She showed me the proof of it, and I'm looking through it, and I come to Galileo, and I look at the description, and then I look at the facsimile, and I said, hang on, this description does not match this facsimile.
They pulled the wrong letter.
I guess they don't read Italian very well.
That's a historical society in Pennsylvania.
So they actually had to tip in the first printing of that catalog,
What they did, in fact, is they didn't cancel it, but they photographed the real letter.
So the first issue of that catalog should have both Galileo letters illustrated, but only one described.
No, actually...
General Madness started with the Legacies of Genius exhibition.
That's a great exhibition.
Yeah, absolutely.
I'll show you.
It started the course of events that culminated in that book.
I'll show you that.
That is great.
I'm going to turn this on the other side.